
Some wit, comparing Bach and Handel, remarked that both masters were
“born in the same year and killed by the same doctor.” Born in the same
year they unquestionably were, Handel almost an exact month before his
great contemporary. Halle, where Handel first saw the light, is a
comparatively short distance from Eisenach, where Bach was cradled. It
lies not far from the eastern boundary of that Saxon-Thuringian country
which harbored some of the imposing musical figures of Germany during
the 17th Century. Such names as those of the famous “three S’s”—Schein,
Scheidt and Schütz—of Kuhnau, Kriedger, Melchior Franck, Ahle,
Rosenmüller, echo powerfully through the history of that period.

George Frideric Handel was born on Monday, February 23, 1685. That the
name has been variously spelled need not trouble us; strict consistency
in such matters lay as lightly on folks of this epoch as it did in the
age of Mozart. However, it may be pointed out that in this booklet
“Frideric” is retained in place of “Frederick” because Handel himself
repeatedly used this form and because the British authorities thus
inscribed him when he became a British citizen.

The Handel family came from Silesia, where Valentine Handel, the
composer’s grandfather, had been a coppersmith in Breslau. George
Handel, the father, had been “barber-surgeon,” attached to the service
of Saxon and Swedish armies, then to that of Duke Augustus of Saxony.
For a time he prospered and in 1665 he bought himself “Am Schlamm,” at
Halle-an-der-Saale, a palatial house, which in the course of years
barely escaped total destruction by fire. In any case, Father Handel was
to know the ups and downs of fortune; and the vicissitudes he endured
did not sweeten an always morose and surly character. He has been
described as “a strong man, a man of vast principles, bigoted, intensely
disagreeable, a man with a rather withered heart.” A portrait of him
gave Romain Rolland “the impression of one who has never smiled.” He was
twice married, the first time to the widow of a barber, a woman ten
years his senior, the second to Dorothea Taust, a pastor’s daughter,
thirty years his junior. By the first he had six children, by the second
four, of whom George Frideric was the second.

Father Handel was 63 when his great son came into the world. The future
composer of “Messiah” was born, not in the elaborate edifice which
carries his bust and is inscribed with the titles of his oratorios, but
in the house adjoining it which stands on a street corner and whose
official address is Nicolai Strasse 5. Yet even this statement must be
qualified. For this presumable “birthplace” was not built till 1800 and,
according to the researches of Newman Flower, stands on the _site_ of
the house in which Handel was born. As for the town of Halle, it had
definitely passed after the death of the Duke Augustus of Saxony, to
Brandenburg; so that, strictly speaking, Handel was born a Prussian.
But, as Rolland has noted, “the childhood of Handel was influenced by
two intellectual forces: the Saxon and the Prussian. Of the two the more
aristocratic, and also most powerful was the Saxon.” At all events,
after the Thirty Years’ War the city of Halle, during the Middle Ages a
center of culture and gaiety, had fallen into a drab provincialism.

[Illustration: The house at Halle where Handel was supposed to have been
   born, decorated with laurels and the names of his oratorios. And—]

      [Illustration: —The house next door in which he _was_ born.]

Apparently the child’s musical susceptibilities developed early and
rather like Mozart’s, even if unlike the latter, he had not the benefit
of a friendly and understanding father. Who has not seen at some time or
other the picture immortalizing the precocity of “the Infant Handel?”
The story goes that the indulgent mother had smuggled a clavichord into
the garret. In the dead of night the child crept to the attic till the
father, aroused by faint tinklings, came with a lantern to investigate.
Whether or not the clavichord was confiscated the result of the parental
raid was a stern prohibition of all sorts of music-making. Some of us
may be reminded by this apparent heartlessness of a rather similar
punishment visited on the youthful Bach, when his elder brother deprived
him of music he had painfully copied out by moonlight for his own use.

The elder Handel’s motive was, according to his own lights, perhaps
quite as defensible. He had no wish to see a son of his degraded to the
rank of a lackey or some form of vagabond, than which a musician at that
time hardly seemed any better. The barber-surgeon fully shared the
prejudice of the average “strong man” against the artist. Rolland
describes the bourgeois middle class German attitude of the 17th Century
on the subject of music: “It was for them a mere art of amusement, and
not a serious profession. Many of the masters of that time, Schütz,
Kuhnau, Rosenmüller, were lawyers or theologians, before they devoted
themselves to music.” And old George Handel is supposed to have
threatened: “If that boy ever shows any further inclination towards
music or noises disguised as such, I will kill it!” There was, indeed,
one way in which the boy could with a certain impunity satisfy his
craving for music—in church, by listening to the organ and the singing
of the choir. Such enjoyment supplanted to some extent the games and
childish pleasures of ordinary boys. He was, it appears, a somewhat
lonely child, who made few friends and whose “playground” was a dismal
courtyard opposite his home.

The father settled on the law as a fine, honest and lucrative profession
for his son. Jurisprudence was to rescue Handel from the snares of
music, just as in time it was to be the “salvation” of Schumann, as
school mastering was by paternal decree to be the destiny of Schubert,
and medicine that of Berlioz. Here, too, it was quite as ineffectual!
All the same, the youth was not to escape his share of legal study; and
by the time he reached 16 he entered the University of Halle as
“studiosus juris.”

About eight years earlier, however, fate in the paradoxical shape of
Father Handel himself took a hand in George Frideric’s future. He had
his son accompany him on a journey to nearby Weissenfels, the residence
of the Duke of Saxony. That personage asked the lad to play something on
the chapel organ and was so stirred by what he heard that he counselled
the obdurate father not to thwart the child’s ambition. From an ordinary
person the hard-boiled parent would have taken such advice in very bad
part; coming from the mouth of a prince it acquired the force of a
command. So he decided to allow his son to study music with the unspoken
reservation, however, that he must belong first and foremost to the law.
Actually, these musical studies might be said to have begun in
Weissenfels, for here young Handel had a chance to hear some of the
works of the Nürnberg master, Johann Krieger; and in this same town, a
mere stone’s throw from Halle, he had his first taste of opera, which
was to thrust deep roots in his soul.